[DOCS-13922] Add OpenTelemetry setup for Kubernetes Explorer (#36589)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/containers/monitoring/kubernetes_explorer.md

For manual setup, see [Set up Kubernetes Explorer with a DaemonSet][5].

[5]: /infrastructure/faq/set-up-orchestrator-explorer-daemonset
{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab "OpenTelemetry" %}}

<div class="alert alert-info">Native OpenTelemetry support for the Kubernetes Explorer is in Preview. Contact your account representative to request access.</div>

You can populate the Kubernetes Explorer using a native OpenTelemetry pipeline instead of the Datadog Agent. This setup uses the [`k8sobjects`][10] receiver to collect Kubernetes resource data and forwards it through the [Datadog Exporter's][11] orchestrator explorer functionality.

#### Prerequisites

- OpenTelemetry Collector Contrib [v0.142.0][12] or later.
- Access enabled on your Datadog instance. Contact your account representative to verify activation.

#### Limitations

> The `k8sobjects` receiver has known scalability issues (see [open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib#43602][13]). In large clusters, the OTel Collector may overwhelm the Kubernetes API server due to the volume and frequency of requests. Enable this feature in smaller clusters first, and monitor API server load before scaling up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `k8sobjects` receiver has known scalability issues (see [open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib#43602][13]) In large clusters, it can place significant load on the Kubernetes API server. 

Recommendations:
1. Use Kubernetes 1.33 or later, which includes [improvements] (https://kubernetes.io/blog/2025/05/09/kubernetes-v1-33-streaming-list-responses/)  that reduce API server impact.
2. Enable this feature in smaller clusters first.  Limit the number of objects per resource type to fewer than 5,000 as a starting point, and scale up gradually while monitoring Kubernetes cluster health.

```

          mode: watch
        - name: pods
          mode: pull
          interval: 3m
        - name: pods
          mode: watch
        - name: nodes
          mode: pull
          interval: 3m
        - name: nodes
          mode: watch
        - name: replicasets
          mode: pull
          interval: 3m
        - name: replicasets
          mode: watch
        - name: daemonsets
          mode: pull
          interval: 3m
        - name: daemonsets
          mode: watch
        - name: statefulsets
          mode: pull
          interval: 3m
          group: apps
        - name: statefulsets
          mode: watch
          group: apps
        - name: cronjobs
          mode: pull
          interval: 3m
        - name: cronjobs
          mode: watch
        - name: jobs
          mode: pull
          interval: 3m
        - name: jobs
          mode: watch
        - name: services
          mode: pull
          interval: 3m
        - name: services
          mode: watch
        - name: deployments
          mode: pull
          interval: 3m
          group: apps
        - name: deployments
          mode: watch
          group: apps
```

##### Processors and pipeline

> Add a `resourcedetection/kubeadm` processor to detect the cluster UID, and a `resource/add-cluster-name` processor to tag all data with your cluster name. Then wire the components together in a `logs/orchestrator` pipeline. Replace `<YOUR_CLUSTER_NAME>` with your cluster name:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add a `resourcedetection` processor to detect the cluster UID and name.

`kubeadm` is required to detect the cluster UID. To automatically detect the cluster name, check the `resourcedetection` processor [guide](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/v0.152.0/processor/resourcedetectionprocessor#amazon-eks) for your cloud provider to enable the k8s.cluster.name attribute.

If your cloud provider is not supported by the `resourcedetection` processor, you can manually add the cluster name using a `resource/add-cluster-name` processor. Replace `<YOUR_CLUSTER_NAME>` with your cluster name.

Then wire the components together in a `logs/orchestrator` pipeline.

```

>         - name: jobs
>           mode: pull
>           interval: 3m
>         - name: jobs
>           mode: watch
>         - name: services
>           mode: pull
>           interval: 3m
>         - name: services
>           mode: watch
>         - name: deployments
>           mode: pull
>           interval: 3m
>           group: apps
>         - name: deployments
>           mode: watch
>           group: apps
> ```
> 
> ##### Processors and pipeline
> 
> Add a `resourcedetection/kubeadm` processor to detect the cluster UID, and a `resource/add-cluster-name` processor to tag all data with your cluster name. Then wire the components together in a `logs/orchestrator` pipeline. Replace `<YOUR_CLUSTER_NAME>` with your cluster name:
> 
> ```yaml
>   processors:
>     resourcedetection/kubeadm:
>       detectors: [kubeadm]
>       timeout: 2s
>       override: false
>       kubeadm:
>         resource_attributes:
>           k8s.cluster.name:
>             enabled: false
>     resource/add-cluster-name:
>       attributes:
>         - key: k8s.cluster.name
>           value: <YOUR_CLUSTER_NAME>
>           action: upsert
> 
>   service:
>     pipelines:
>       logs/orchestrator:
>         receivers: [k8sobjects]
>         processors: [resourcedetection/kubeadm, resource/add-cluster-name]
>         exporters: [datadog]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```yaml
  processors:
    # Adjust the `k8s.cluster.name` section for your cloud provider.
    resourcedetection:
      detectors: [env, kubeadm, eks, ec2, aks, azure, gcp, system]
      override: false
      kubeadm:
        resource_attributes:
          k8s.cluster.name:
            enabled: false
      eks:
        resource_attributes:
          k8s.cluster.name:
            enabled: true
      aks:
        resource_attributes:
          k8s.cluster.name:
            enabled: true

    # # Optional: manually inject the cluster name if the resourcedetection processor does not support your cloud provider.
    # resource/add-cluster-name:
    #       attributes:
    #         - key: k8s.cluster.name
    #           value: <YOUR_CLUSTER_NAME>
    #           action: upsert

  service:
    pipelines:
      logs/orchestrator:
        receivers: [k8sobjects]
        processors: [resourcedetection]
        exporters: [datadog]
```

```

> The `resourcedetection/kubeadm` processor detects the cluster UID (`k8s.cluster.uid`), which the Datadog Exporter requires for orchestrator data. Cluster name detection is disabled so the manually set name from `resource/add-cluster-name` takes precedence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
we can probably remove this part as we explain it here: https://github.com/DataDog/documentation/pull/36589/changes#r3233908204

#### 3. Deploy with Helm

Install the OpenTelemetry Collector using your configuration file:

```sh
helm repo add open-telemetry https://open-telemetry.github.io/opentelemetry-helm-charts
helm repo update

helm install deployment-collector open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector \
  --values ./deployment-collector.yaml
```

#### 4. Verify the installation

> Open the [Kubernetes Explorer][1] and filter by your OpenTelemetry cluster name. Your pod and namespace data should appear in the Explorer.

Reviewer 2: > `Your pod and namespace data should appear in the Explorer.` 

Customers should expect all core k8s resources sections to be populated in the Explorer, including "Custom Resources/CRD" and excluding "Custom Resources/Resources" which is not yet supproted

For manual setup, see [Set up Kubernetes Explorer with a DaemonSet][5].

[5]: /infrastructure/faq/set-up-orchestrator-explorer-daemonset
{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab "OpenTelemetry" %}}

<div class="alert alert-info">Native OpenTelemetry support for the Kubernetes Explorer is in Preview. Contact your account representative to request access.</div>

You can populate the Kubernetes Explorer using a native OpenTelemetry pipeline instead of the Datadog Agent. This setup uses the [`k8sobjects`][100] receiver to collect Kubernetes resource data and forwards it through the [Datadog Exporter's][101] orchestrator explorer functionality.

#### Prerequisites

> - OpenTelemetry Collector Contrib [v0.142.0][102] or later.

Reviewer 2: Let's update the minimum version here to `v.0.152.0`. The previous one had an issue that could prevent k8s resources to be correctly enriched with host tags.

- Access enabled on your Datadog instance. Contact your account representative to verify activation.

#### Limitations

> The `k8sobjects` receiver has known scalability issues (see [open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib#43602][103]). In large clusters, it can place significant load on the Kubernetes API server.

Reviewer 3: We should remove this direct link to a specific issue. It feels not quite right and its hard to follow if you don't have full context.

Suggested rephrase: 
The open source `k8sobjects` receiver can place significant load on a cluster's Kubernetes API server. Modify the time interval in Resource Collection if you experience issues.

cc: @moisesbotarro

Recommendations:
1. Use Kubernetes 1.33 or later, which includes [streaming list improvements][106] that reduce API server impact.
2. Start with smaller clusters. Limit the number of objects per resource type to fewer than 5,000 as a starting point, and scale up gradually while monitoring cluster health.

#### 1. Create a Datadog API key secret

Create a Kubernetes secret to store your Datadog API key:

```sh
export DD_API_KEY="<YOUR_DATADOG_API_KEY>"
kubectl create secret generic datadog-secret --from-literal api-key=$DD_API_KEY
```

#### 2. Configure the cluster collector

This setup deploys the OTel Collector as a Kubernetes Deployment. Create a `deployment-collector.yaml` file and add each of the following configuration sections.

##### Collector image and mode

Set the Collector to run as a single-replica Deployment using the Contrib distribution:

```yaml
mode: deployment
replicaCount: 1

image:
  repository: otel/opentelemetry-collector-contrib

>   tag: 0.142.0

Reviewer 2: ditto
